<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>XXIII: The Poem</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section data-parent="book-3" id="chapter-23" epub:type="chapter">
			<header>
				<hgroup>
					<h3 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">XXIII</h3>
					<p epub:type="title">The Poem</p>
				</hgroup>
				<blockquote epub:type="epigraph">
					<p>
						<span>“I’ve shot my arrow o’er the house</span>
						<br/>
						<span>And hurt my brother.”</span>
					</p>
					<cite>
						<i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Hamlet</i>
					</cite>
				</blockquote>
			</header>
			<p>When Miss Belinda first saw Paula, she did not, like her sister, remark upon the elegance of her appearance, the growth of her beauty, or the evidences of increased refinement in the expression of her countenance and the carriage of her form, but with her usual penetration noted simply, the sadness in her eye and the tremulous motion of her lip.</p>
			<p>“You had then become fond of your cousin?” queried she with characteristic bluntness.</p>
			<p>Paula not understanding the motive of this remark, questioned her with a look.</p>
			<p>“Young faces do not grow pale or bright eyes become troubled without a cause. Grief for your cousin might explain it, but if you have suffered from no grief⁠—”</p>
			<p>“My cousin was very kind to me,” hurriedly interrupted Paula. “Her death was very sudden and very heartrending.”</p>
			<p>“So it was;” returned Miss Belinda, “and I expected to see you look worn and sad but not restless and feverish. You have a living grief, Paula, what is it?”</p>
			<p>The young girl started and looked down. For the first time in her life she wished to avoid that penetrating glance. “If I have, I cannot talk of it,” she murmured. “I have experienced so much this past week; my coming away was so unexpected, that I hardly understand my own feelings, or realize just what it is that troubles me most. All that I know is, that I am very tired and so sad, it seems as if the sun would never shine again.”</p>
			<p>“There is then something you have not written me?” inquired the inexorable Miss Belinda.</p>
			<p>“The experiences of this last week could never be written⁠—or told,” returned Paula with a droop of her head. “Upon some things our better wisdom places a stone which only the angels can roll away. The future lies all open before us; do not let us disturb the past.”</p>
			<p>And Miss Belinda was forced to be content lest she should seem to be over anxious.</p>
			<p>Not so the various neighbors and friends to whom the lengthened sojourn of one of their number in an atmosphere of such wealth and splendor, possessed something of the charm of a forbidden romance. For months Paula was obliged to endure questions, that it required all her self-control to answer with calmness and propriety. But at length the most insatiable gossip amongst them was satisfied; Paula’s figure was no longer a novelty in their streets; curiosity languished and the young girl was allowed to rest.</p>
			<p>And now could those who loved her, discern that with the lapse of time and the daily breathings of her native air, the sad white look had faded from her face, leaving it a marvel of freshness and positive, if somewhat spiritualized, beauty. The print of deeper thoughts and holier yearnings was there, but no sign of blighted hopes or uncomprehended passions. A passing wind had blown the froth from off the cup, but had not disturbed the sparkle of the wine. She had looked in the face of grief, but had not as yet been clasped in her relentless arms. Only two things could vitally disturb her; a letter from Cicely, or a sudden meeting in the village streets with that elderly lady who haunted the Japha mansion. The former because it recalled a life around which her fancies still played with dangerous persistency, and the latter because it aroused vain and inexplicable conjectures as to that person’s strange and lingering look in her direction. Otherwise she was happy; finding in this simple village-life a meaning and a purpose which her short but passionate outlook on a broader field, had taught her, perhaps, both to detect and comprehend. She no longer walked solitary with nature. The woods, the mountains with all their varying panoply of exuberant verdure, had acquired a human significance. At her side went the memories of beloved faces, the thoughts of trusted friends. From the clouds looked forth a living eye, and in the sound of rustling leaf and singing streamlet, spake the voices of human longing and human joy.</p>
			<p>Her aunts had explained their position to Paula and she had responded by expressing her determination to be a teacher. But they would not hear of that at present, and while she waited their pleasure in the matter, she did what she could to assist them in their simple home-life and daily duties, lending her beauty to tasks that would have made the eyes of some of her quondam admirers open with surprise, if only they could have followed the action of her hands, after having once caught a glimpse of the face that brightened above them. And so the summer months went by and September came.</p>
			<p>There was to be an entertainment in the village and Paula was to assist. The idea had come from her aunt and was not to be rejected. In one of the strange incomprehensible moods which sometimes came upon her at this time, she had written a poem, and nothing would do but that she must read it before the assembled company of neighbors and friends, that were to be gathered at the Squire’s house on this gala evening. She did not wish to do it. The sacred sense of possession passes when we uncover our treasure to another’s eyes, giving way to a lower feeling not to be courted by one of Paula’s sensitive nature. Besides she would rather have poured this first outburst of secret enthusiasm into other ears than these; but she had given her word and the ordeal must be submitted to. There are many who remember how she looked on that night. She had arrayed herself for the occasion, in the prettiest of her dresses, and mindful of Ona’s injunction, did not mar the effect of its soft and uniform gray with any hint of extraneous color. The result was that they saw only her beauty; and what beauty! A very old man, an early settler in the village, who had tottered out to enjoy a last glimpse of life before turning his aged face to the wall, said it made the thought of heaven a little more real. “I can go home and think how the angels look,” said he in his simple, half-childish way. And no one contradicted him, for there was a still light on her face that was less of earth than heaven, though why it should rest there tonight she least of all could have told, for her poem had to do with earth and its deepest passions and its wildest unrest. It was a clarion blast, not a dreaming rhapsody, that lay coiled up in the paper she held in her hand.</p>
			<p>My readers must pardon me if I give them Paula’s poem, for without it they would not understand its effect and consequent result. It was called, “The Defence of the Bride,” and was of the old ballad order. As she rose to read, many of the younger ones in the audience began cautiously to move to one side, but at the first words, young as well as old paused and listened where they stood, for her voice was round and full, and the memory of clashing spears and whirling battle-axes that informed the war-song which she had heard Bertram play, was with her, to give color to her tones and fire to her glance.</p>
			<div class="ph4">THE DEFENCE OF THE BRIDE.</div>
			<div class="poem">
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">He was coming from the altar when the tocsin rang alarm,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">With his fair young wife beside him, lovely in her bridal charm;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But he was not one to palter with a duty, or to slight<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The trumpet-call of honor for his vantage or delight.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Turning from the bride beside him to his stern and martial train,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">From their midst he summoned to him the brothers of Germain;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">At the word they stepped before him, nine strong warriors brave and true,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">From the youngest to the eldest, Enguerrand to mighty Hugh.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“Sons of Germain, to your keeping do I yield my bride today.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Guard her well as you do love me; guard her well and holily.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Dearer than mine own soul to me, you will hold her as your life,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">’Gainst the guile of seeming friendship and the force of open strife.”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“We will guard her,” cried they firmly; and with just another glance<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">On the yearning and despairing in his young wife’s countenance,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Gallant Beaufort strode before them down the aisle and through the door,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And a shadow came and lingered where the sunlight stood before.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Eight long months the young wife waited, watching from her bridal room<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">For the coming of her husband up the valley forest’s gloom.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Eight long months the sons of Germain paced the ramparts and the wall,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">With their hands upon their halberds ready for the battle-call.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Then there came a sound of trumpets pealing up the vale below,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And a dozen floating banners lit the forest with their glow,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And the bride arose like morning when it feels the sunlight nigh,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And her smile was like a rainbow flashing from a misty sky.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">But the eldest son of Germain lifting voice from off the wall,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Cried aloud, “It is a stranger’s and not Sir Beaufort’s call;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Have you ne’er a slighted lover or a kinsman with a heart<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Base enough to seek his vengeance at the sharp end of the dart?”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“There is Sassard of the Mountains,” answered she without guile,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“While I wedded at the chancel, he stood mocking in the aisle;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And my maidens say he swore there that for all my plighted vow,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">They would see me in his castle yet upon Morency’s brow.”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“It is Sassard and no other then,” her noble guardian cried;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“There is craft in yonder summons,” and he rung his sword beside.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“To the walls, ye sons of Germain! and as each would hold his life<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">From the bitter shame of falsehood, let us hold our master’s wife.”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“Can you hold her, can you shield her from the breezes that await?”<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Cried the stinging voice of Sassard from his stand beside the gate.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“If you have the power to shield her from the sunlight and the wind,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">You may shield her from stern Sassard when his falchion is untwined.”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“We can hold her, we can shield her,” leaped like fire from off the wall,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And young Enguerrand the valiant, sprang out before them all.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“And if breezes bring dishonor, we will guard her from their breath,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Though we yield her to the keeping of the sacred arms of Death.”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">And with force that never faltered, did they guard her all that day,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Though the strength of triple armies seemed to battle in the fray,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">The old castle’s rugged ramparts holding firm against the foe,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">As a goodly dyke resisteth the whelming billow’s flow.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">But next morning as the sunlight rose in splendor over all,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Hugh the mighty, sank heart-wounded in his station on the wall,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">At the noon the valiant Raoul of the merry eye and heart,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Gave his beauty and his jestings to the foeman’s jealous dart.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Gallant Maurice next sank faltering with a death wound ’neath his hair,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But still fighting on till Sassard pressed across him up the stair.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Generous Clement followed after, crying as his spirit passed,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“Sons of Germain to the rescue, and be loyal to the last!”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Gentle Jaspar, lordly Clarence, Sessamine the doughty brand,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Even Henri who had yielded ne’er before to mortal hand;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">One by one they fall and perish, while the vaunting foemen pour<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Through the breach and up the courtway to the very turret’s door.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Enguerrand and Stephen only now were left of all that nine,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">To protect the single stairway from the traitor’s fell design;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But with might as ’twere of thirty, did they wield the axe and brand,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Striving in their desperation the fierce onslaught to withstand.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">But what man of power so godlike he can stay the billow’s wrack,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Or with single-handed weapon hold an hundred foemen back!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">As the sun turned sadly westward, with a wild despairing cry,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Stephen bowed his noble forehead and sank down on earth to die.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“Ah ha!” then cried cruel Sassard with his foot upon the stair,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“Have I come to thee, my boaster?” and he whirled his sword in air.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“Thou who pratest of thy power to protect her to the death,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">What think’st thou now of Sassard and the wind’s aspiring breath?”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“What I think let this same show you,” answered fiery Enguerrand,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And he poised his lofty battle-ax with sure and steady hand;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“Now as Heaven loveth justice, may this deathly weapon fall<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">On the murderer of my brothers and th’ undoer of us all.”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">With one mighty whirl he sent it; flashing from his hand it came,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Like the lightning from the heavens in a whirl of awful flame,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And betwixt the brows of Sassard and his two false eyeballs passed,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And the murderer sank before it, like a tree before the blast.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“Now ye minions of a traitor if you look for vengeance, come!”<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And his voice was like a trumpet when it clangs a victor home.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But a cry from far below him rose like thunder upward, “Nay!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Let them turn and meet the <em>husband</em> if they hunger for the fray.”<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">O the yell that sprang to heaven as that voice swept up the stair,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And the slaughter dire that followed in another moment there!<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">From the least unto the greatest, from the henchman to the lord,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Not a man on all that stairway lived to sheath again his sword.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">At the top that flame-bound forehead, at the base that blade of fire⁠—<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">’Twas the meeting of two tempests in their potency and ire.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Ere the moon could falter inward with its pity and its woe,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Beaufort saw the path before him unencumbered of the foe.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">Saw his pathway unencumbered and strode up and o’er the floor,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Even to the very threshold of his lovely lady’s door,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">And already in his fancy did he see the golden beam<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Of her locks upon his shoulder and her sweet eyes’ happy gleam:<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">When behold a form upstarting from the shadows at his side.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">That with naked sword uplifted barred the passage to his bride;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">It was Enguerrand the dauntless, but with staring eyes and hair<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Blowing wild about a forehead pale as snow in moonlit glare.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“Ah my master, we have held her, we have guarded her,” he said,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“Not a shadow of dishonor has so much as touched her head.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Twenty wretches lie below there with the brothers of Germain,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Twenty foemen of her honor that I, Enguerrand, have slain.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“But one other foe remaineth, one remaineth yet,” he cried,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“Which it fits this hand to punish ere you cross unto your bride.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">It is I, Enguerrand!” shrieked he; “and as I have slain the rest,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">So I smite this foeman also!”⁠—and his sword plunged through his breast.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">O the horror of that moment! “Art thou mad my Enguerrand?”<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Cried his master, striving wildly to withdraw the fatal brand.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">But the stern youth smiling sadly, started back from his embrace,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">While a flash like summer lightning, flickered direful on his face.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“Yes, a traitor worse than Sassard;” and he pointed down the stair,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“For my heart has dared to love her whom my hand defended there.<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">While the others fought for honor, I by passion was made strong,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Set your heel upon my bosom for my soul has done you wrong.<br/></span>
				</div>
				<div class="stanza">
					<span class="i0">“But,” and here he swayed and faltered till his knee sank on the floor,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">Yet in falling turned his forehead ever toward that silent door;<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">“But your warrior hand my master, may take mine without a stain,<br/></span>
					<span class="i0">For my hand has e’er been loyal, and your enemy is slain.”<br/></span>
				</div>
			</div>
			<p>A short silence followed the last word, then a burst of applause testified to the appreciation of her audience, and Paula crept away to hide her blushing cheeks in the comparative darkness of a little vine-covered balcony that jutted out from the anteroom. What were her thoughts as she leaned there! In the subsidence of any great emotion⁠—and Paula had felt every word she uttered⁠—there is more or less of shock and tumult. She did not think, she only felt. Suddenly a hand was laid on her arm and a low voice whispered in her ear,</p>
			<p>“Did you write that poem yourself?”</p>
			<p>Turning, she encountered the shadowy form of a woman leaning close at her side and appearing in the dim light that shone on her from the lamps beyond, an eager image of expectancy.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” returned Paula, “why do you ask?”</p>
			<p>The woman, whoever she was, did not answer. “And you believe in such devotion as that!” she murmured. “You can understand a man, aye, or a woman either, risking happiness and fame, life and death, for the sake of a trust! Such things are not folly to you! You could see a heart spill itself drop by drop through a longer vigil than the eight months watching on the ramparts, and not sneer at a fidelity that could not falter because it had given its word? Speak; you write of faithfulness with a pen of fire, is your heart faithful too?”</p>
			<p>There was something in these words, spoken as they were in a tone of suppressed passion, that startled and aroused Paula. Leaning forward, she endeavored to see the face of the woman who thus forcibly addressed her, but the light was too dim. The outline of a brow covered by some close headgear was all she could detect.</p>
			<p>“You speak earnestly,” said Paula, “but that is what I like. Fidelity to a cause, or fidelity to a trust, demands the sympathy and admiration of all honest and generous hearts. If I am ever called upon to maintain either, I hope that my enthusiasm will not have all been expended in words.”</p>
			<p>“You please me,” murmured the woman, “you please me; will you come and see me and let me tell you a story to mate the poem you have given us tonight?”</p>
			<p>The trembling eagerness of her tone it would be impossible to describe. Paula was thrilled by it. “If you will tell me who you are,” said Paula, “I certainly will try and come. I should be glad to hear anything you have to relate to me.”</p>
			<p>“I thought everyone knew who I was,” returned the woman; and drawing Paula back into the anteroom, she turned her face upon her. “Anyone will tell you where Margery Hamlin lives,” said she. “Do not disappoint me, and do not keep me waiting long.” And with a nod and a deep strange smile that made her aged face almost youthful, she entered the crowd and disappeared from Paula’s sight.</p>
			<p>It was the woman whose nightly visits to the deserted home of the Japhas had once been the talk and was still the unsolved mystery of the town.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
